V3 (#119)
deity-io/falcon-platform-docs: docs/platform/server-v3/modules/common-services/data-sources.md

---
id: data-sources
title: Data Sources in Falcon Server
sidebar_label: Data Sources
enterprise_only: true
---

import Tabs from '@theme/Tabs';
import TabItem from '@theme/TabItem';

[Apollo Server documentation](https://www.apollographql.com/docs/apollo-server/data/data-sources/) says:

> Data sources are classes that Apollo Server can use to encapsulate fetching data from a particular source, such as a database or a REST API. These classes help handle caching, deduplication, and errors while resolving operations.

Falcon Server Data Sources extends [Apollo Server Data Sources](https://www.apollographql.com/docs/apollo-server/data/data-sources/) this is why if you are not familiar with DataSources concept we strongly recommend learning that topic first.

In Falcon ecosystem Data Sources are used to fetch data from all the back-ends, e.g. if you have integration with BigCommerce then [BigCommerce Module](./modules/bigcommerce-module) exposes `FalconBigCommerceDataSource` which implements the communication layer between Falcon and BigCommerce. It contains authentication and authorization logic and does everything that's needed to fetch the required data.

> The same applies to all the integrations - there's always an integration-specific Data Source that realizes the communication.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The same applies to all the integrations - there's always an integration-specific Data Source that implements the communication.
```

Author: I think it should stays as it is

> Falcon Server will treat particular service as Data Source until it extends [Apollo's abstract Data Source class](https://github.com/apollographql/apollo-server/blob/main/packages/apollo-datasource/src/index.ts). However, the Falcon Server expects that concrete DataSource has an additional `name` property. This is why each DataSource registered in Falcon Server needs to:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Falcon Server will treat one service as Data Source [Apollo's abstract Data Source class](https://github.com/apollographql/apollo-server/blob/main/packages/apollo-datasource/src/index.ts), but expects that new DataSource has an additional `name` property. This is why each DataSource registered in Falcon Server needs to:
```

Author: I am sorry but I think current version has greater informative value, it is less ambiguous

> - extends [Apollo's abstract Data Source class](https://github.com/apollographql/apollo-server/blob/main/packages/apollo-datasource/src/index.ts)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- extend [Apollo's abstract Data Source class](https://github.com/apollographql/apollo-server/blob/main/packages/apollo-datasource/src/index.ts)
```

Author: I think it should stay as it is

> - implements Falcon Server `IDataSource` interface which is defined as follows

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- implement Falcon Server `IDataSource` interface which is defined as follows
```

Author: I think it should stay as it is

```ts
import { DataSourceConfig } from 'apollo-datasource';

export interface IDataSource<TGqlResolverContext extends GraphQLContext = GraphQLContext> {
  name: string;

  initialize?(config: DataSourceConfig<TGqlResolverContext>): void | Promise<void>;
}
```

`@deity/falcon-server-env` package exports couple of base classes, which meets above conditions by default. You should extends them in order to implement your custom DataSource. But it is fair enough to use any other, found on npm registry, please bear in mind that those need to implement the `IDataSource` interface too. Full list of base `DataSource` classes:

- [`DataSource`](#datasource)
- [`RESTDataSource`](#restdatasource)
- `ApiDataSource` - deprecated, use `RESTDataSource` instead
- [`GqlDataSource`](#gqldatasource)

## `DataSource`

The very base class of Falcon Server DataSource.

```ts
import { DataSource as ApolloDataSource } from 'apollo-datasource';
import { injectable } from 'inversify';

@injectable()
export abstract class DataSource extends ApolloDataSource implements IDataSource {
  public name: string;

  constructor(name: string) {
    super();

    this.name = name;
  }
}
```

> - `name: string` - defines the name of a particular DataSource. Its value is used as a key on the GraphQL resolver context DataSources map, and this is why it needs to be unique.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- `name: string` - defines the name of concrete DataSource. This value is used as a key in GraphQL resolver context DataSources map and **have to be unique**.
```

Author: done

## `RESTDataSource`

> Base Data Source class which realizes communication with any REST based API.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Base Data Source class which implements communication with any REST based API.
```

Author: I think it should stay as it is

DEITY Falcon provides also its own Data Source abstract class `RESTDataSource`. That class extends [RESTDataSource class](https://github.com/apollographql/apollo-server/tree/main/packages/apollo-datasource-rest) provided by Apollo.

> This Data Source is recommended to be used as a base class for data sources that work as resolvers (see [resolvers auto-binding](#resolvers-auto-binding) section above).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This Data Source is a  recommended base class for data sources that work as resolvers (see [resolvers auto-binding](#resolvers-auto-binding) section above).
```

Author: done

> Constructor definitions looks as follow

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Constructor definition looks as follow
```

Author: done

<Tabs>
<TabItem value="TypeScript" default>

```ts
import { injectable, inject } from 'inversify';
import { RESTDataSource, injectModuleConfig } from '@deity/falcon-server-env';

@injectable()
export class CustomDataSource extends RESTDataSource {
  constructor(@inject('fetch') fetch, @injectModuleConfig('custom') config) {
    super({ restDataSourceFetch: fetch, name: 'custom', config });
  }

  getCustomData() {
    return this.get('http://custom.com');
  }
}
```

</TabItem>
<TabItem value="JavaScript">

```js
const { injectable, inject, decorate } = require('inversify');
const { RESTDataSource } = require('@deity/falcon-server-env');

class CustomDataSource extends RESTDataSource {
  constructor(fetch, config) {
    super({ restDataSourceFetch: fetch, name: 'custom', config });
  }

  getCustomData() {
    return this.get('/data');
  }
}
decorate(injectable(), CustomDataSource);
decorate(inject('fetch'), CustomDataSource, 0);
decorate(injectModuleConfig('custom'), CustomDataSource, 1);

module.exports = {
  CustomDataSource
};
```

</TabItem>
</Tabs>

> The dependency injection was demonstrated on `RESTDataSource`, but the same mechanism can be applied to each DataSource.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The dependency injection demonstrated on `RESTDataSource` example can be also applied to any DataSource.
```

Author: done
